Current roughness data are obtained through expensive but accurate procedures. The alternative of a
cellphone accelerometer-based measurement of IRI would be of relevance as it does not require
expensive equipment or highly qualified personnel. However, the question of its practical accuracy is
raised and within this accuracy what its capabilities would be for pavement management and
planification.

To test the accuracy and repeatability of measurements, several runs under varying conditions were
performed for Windsor Road on the 2 nd November. It was found that, in accordance to other recent
literature, the use of a sedan car yielded results closer to reality on all surfaces and conditions, when
compared to an SUV.

After the use of the sedan, we found that results were repeatable and in accordance with profilometer
roughness data. To do this we tried the software measuring roughness on Interstate Drive (PCC) and
State Street (AC), both in Champaign, IL to confirm the accuracy on varying road surfaces, speed levels
(15 and 30 mph) on the 7 th of November.

Finally, its possible use as a decision support tool was assessed by contrasting the results obtained
with current management practices with the city of Champaign. After meeting with officials from
Champaign City Public Works (see Annex 7.2), a region was analyzed for PCI contrasting on November
29 th the correlation between official measurements and IRI data with 3 different regression techniques
was performed.

In all cases an adequate correlation was found, where forest models yielded the best correlation.
However, these are not enough to make a highly accurate prediction of PCI values (specially in mid-
range values), rather its use is recommended for pre-screening of streets requiring in-depth studying.
The use of this tool could give consistent readings with a set of calibrated cars from Champaign City
Public Works, yielding a reasonable degree of accuracy for road status control over time in residential
areas. Also, its value could be increased by coupling recorded data with video footage, and could
become a cheap, versatile tool for PMS. Final report [here]()
